Discussion Paper
Deutsche Bundesbank
No 09/2018
Cheap talk?
Financial sanctions and non-financial activity
Tibor Besedes
(Georgia Institute of Technology)
Stefan Goldbach
(Deutsche Bundesbank)
Volker Nitsch
(Technische Universität Darmstadt and CESifo)
Discussion Papers represent the authors` personal opinions and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the Deutsche Bundesbank or the Eurosystem.
Editorial Board:
Deutsche Bundesbank, Wilhelm-Epstein-Straße 14, 60431 Frankfurt am Main,
Postfach 10 06 02, 60006 Frankfurt am Main
Tel +49 69 9566-0
Please address all orders in writing to: Deutsche Bundesbank,
Press and Public Relations Division, at the above address or via fax +49 69 9566-3077
Internet http://www.bundesbank.de
Reproduction permitted only if source is stated.
ISBN 978­3­95729­442­5 (Printversion)
ISBN 978­3­95729­443­2 (Internetversion)
Daniel Foos
Thomas Kick
Malte Knüppel
Jochen Mankart
Christoph Memmel
Panagiota Tzamourani
Non-technical summary
Research Question
This paper examines the effect of financial sanctions on the country imposing them. In
particular, we analyze the business responses of German non-financial entities to the
imposition of sanctions on 23 countries over the period from 1999 through 2014.
Contribution
We begin with an analysis of the direct costs of sanctions in terms of cross-border
business that is lost using monthly balance of payments transactions between January
1999 and December 2014. Next, we characterize non-financial firms affected by
sanctions in more detail. The transaction data also enable us to explore the response of
sanctions-affected declarants directly. In particular, we aim to identify possible
sanctions evasion behavior by non-financial reporting units. Finally, we examine the
impact of sanctions on firm-level variables such as total sales and the number of
employees using corporate balance sheet data.
Results
We find four key results. First, German financial activities with sanctioned countries are
sizably reduced after the imposition of sanctions, with strong reductions in the scope of
cross-border activities (i.e., the extensive margin with fewer firms and fewer asset
categories) and less statistically robust results for total financial flows (sum of inflows
and outflows) which is consistent with the concept of `smart sanctions'. Second, firms
doing business with sanctioned countries tend to be disproportionately large, making
them largely immune to the reduction in business opportunities with individual partners.
Third, firms affected by sanctions expand their activities with non-sanctioned countries,
some of which display close trade ties to the sanctioned country. Fourth, we find no
effect of sanctions on aggregate variables of firm performance such as employment or
total sales. Overall, we conclude that the economic costs of financial sanctions to the
sender country are limited.
Nichttechnische Zusammenfassung
Fragestellung
Die vorliegende Arbeit untersucht, wie sich Finanzsanktionen auf das Senderland aus-
wirken. Dazu analysieren wir die Reaktionen deutscher nicht-finanzieller Unternehmen
auf die Einführung von Sanktionen gegen 23 Länder im Zeitraum von 1999 bis 2014.
Beitrag
Wir analysieren zunächst die direkten Kosten von Sanktionen im Hinblick auf den
Umfang grenzüberschreitender Geschäfte, indem wir monatliche Transaktionsdaten aus
der Zahlungsbilanz zwischen Januar 1999 und Dezember 2014 auswerten. Danach
charakterisieren wir die nicht-finanziellen Unternehmen, die von Sanktionen betroffen
sind, im Detail. Die Transaktionsdaten ermöglichen uns zudem, die Reaktionen von
nicht-finanziellen Unternehmen zu untersuchen, die direkt von den Sanktions-
maßnahmen betroffen sind und ein mögliches Ausweichverhalten dieser Unternehmen
zu identifizieren. Schließlich untersuchen wir die Auswirkungen von Sanktionen auf
firmenspezifische Kennziffern wie Gesamtumsätze und Mitarbeiteranzahl mit Hilfe der
Unternehmensbilanzstatistik.
Ergebnisse
Wir erhalten vier Hauptergebnisse. Erstens werden deutsche Finanzaktivitäten mit
sanktionierten Ländern nach der Einführung restriktiver Maßnahmen deutlich ein-
geschränkt. Dies erfolgt vor allem über einen starken Rückgang der grenzüber-
schreitenden Aktivitäten am extensiven Rand (z.B. weniger Unternehmen und weniger
Vermögensklassen) und statistisch weniger robust bei den gesamten Finanzströmen
(Summe aus Mittelzu- und -abflüssen), was mit dem Konzept gezielter Sanktionen kon-
sistent ist. Zweitens sind Unternehmen, die Geschäfte mit sanktionierten Ländern
tätigen, größer und international aktiver, so dass sie eine Verringerung der
Geschäftsaktivitäten mit einzelnen Partnern besser abfedern können. Drittens erweitern
von Sanktionen betroffene Unternehmen ihre Aktivitäten mit nicht sanktionierten
Ländern, welche wiederum zum Teil enge Handelskontakte mit den sanktionierten
Ländern unterhalten. Viertens finden wir keinen Effekt von Sanktionen auf Variablen
der Unternehmensleistung wie Beschäftigung oder Gesamtumsatz. Insgesamt kommen
wir zu dem Schluss, dass die wirtschaftlichen Kosten von Finanzsanktionen für das
Senderland eher begrenzt sind.
DEUTSCHE BUNDESBANK DISCUSSION PAPER NO 09/2018
Cheap Talk? Financial Sanctions and Non-Financial Activity1
Tibor Besedes
Georgia Institute of
Technology
Stefan Goldbach
Deutsche Bundesbank
Volker Nitsch
Technische
Universität Darmstadt
and CESifo
Abstract
Sanctions restrict cross-border interactions and, therefore, not only put political and economic
pressure on the target country, but they also adversely affect the sender country. This paper
examines the effect of financial sanctions on the country imposing them. In particular, we
analyze the business responses of German non-financial entities to the imposition of sanctions
on 23 countries over the period from 1999 through 2014. Examining highly disaggregated,
monthly data from the German balance of payments statistics, we find four main results. First,
German financial activities with sanctioned countries are sizably reduced after the imposition
of sanctions, with strong reductions in the scope of cross-border activities (i.e., the extensive
margin with fewer firms and fewer asset categories) and less statistically robust results for
total financial flows (sum of inflows and outflows) which is consistent with the concept of
`smart sanctions'. Second, firms doing business with sanctioned countries tend to be
disproportionately large, making them largely immune to the reduction in business
opportunities with individual partners. Third, firms affected by sanctions expand their
activities with non-sanctioned countries, some of which display close trade ties to the
sanctioned country. Fourth, we find no effect of sanctions on aggregate variables of firm
performance such as employment or total sales. Overall, we conclude that the economic costs
of financial sanctions to the sender country are limited.
Keywords: sanction; restriction; cross-border transaction
JEL-Classification: F20; F36; F38; F51
1 Corresponding author. Contact address: Hochschulstrasse 1, 64289 Darmstadt. E-Mail: nitsch@vwl.tu-
darmstadt.de. The authors thank Jeff Chan, Nikolaos Charalampidis, Ulrich Grosch and participants at
presentations in Aarhus, Antigonish, Darmstadt, Frankfurt, Malmö, and San Diego for helpful comments. The
views expressed in this paper are those of the authors and do not necessarily coincide with the views of the
Deutsche Bundesbank or the Eurosystem.
1
1. Introduction
Sanctions are a popular instrument in international diplomacy. The European Union,
for instance, currently imposes restrictive measures on 38 countries and terrorist groups2,
arguing that sanctions help to promote their foreign policy objectives of "peace, democracy
and the respect for the rule of law, human rights and international law". 3 Hufbauer, Schott,
Elliott, and Oegg (2007) compile an extensive and repeatedly updated database of sanctions
episodes, which, in its most recent version, covers 204 case studies over the period from 1914
to 2006.
Still, despite their frequent use, sanctions are under dispute, for at least two reasons.
First, sanctions are typically found to be ineffective in changing the policies of the target
country. While both the definition of success as well as the contribution to success made by
sanctions depends to a significant degree on subjective evaluation, sanctions often seem to fail
to achieve their objectives.4 Hufbauer, Schott, Elliott, and Oegg (2007), for instance, using an
index ranging from 1 to 16 to assess individual sanctions episodes, classify about one in three
cases as successful.5 Biersteker, Eckert, Tourinho, and Hudáková (2013, p. 21) are even more
pessimistic; they argue that UN targeted sanctions achieve their purposes only 22 percent of
the time. More importantly, attempts to identify factors that determine whether or not
sanctions are effective often yield inconclusive results; see Kaempfer and Lowenberg (2007)
for a review.
Second, sanctions also imply costs for the sender country. The reduction of bilateral
relations not only restricts sanctioned entities and their ability to interact, but also limits the
business opportunities of the sanctioning country. Consequently, business groups in the
sanctions-imposing country typically oppose such measures. When the U.S. government, for
instance, considered a tightening of sanctions against Russia in June 2014, the U.S. Chamber
of Commerce and the National Association of Manufacturers issued a newspaper
advertisement stating that "[w]e are concerned about actions that would harm American
2 See the list of restrictive measures in force, available at
https://eeas.europa.eu/sites/eeas/files/restrictive_measures-2016-10-11-clean.pdf.
3 Masters (2015) even notes that "because the EU lacks a joint military force, many European
leaders consider sanctions the bloc's most powerful foreign policy tool".
4 Levy (1999) convincingly illustrates this point by discussing different views about the role
of trade sanctions in ending the apartheid regime in South Africa.
5 For the 204 sanctions episodes listed at
http://www.piie.com/research/topics/sanctions/sanctions-timeline.cfm, the average success
score is 6.9; see also Table 6.1 in Hufbauer, Schott, Elliott, and Oegg (2007).
2
manufacturers and cost American jobs. [...] The only effect of such sanctions is to bar U.S.
companies from foreign markets and cede business opportunities to firms from other
countries." 6 German corporate executives are reported to have warned, in similar fashion,
against escalating the measures ("German Businesses Urge Halt on Sanctions Against
Russia", The Wall Street Journal, May 1, 2014).
In practice, sanctions affect the sender's economy in many ways, making
quantification of their overall domestic burden difficult. Apart from the immediate reduction
in foreign market access, possible costs include the general increase in uncertainty associated
with conflict escalation, the risk of countermeasures by the sanctioned country and a long-
term loss of the foreign market due to greater competition from non-sanctioning countries. At
the other extreme, sender countries may also benefit from the imposition of restrictive
measures. Cutting aid or official credits, for instance, implies an immediate reduction in
budgetary expenditures, as noted by Hufbauer, Schott, Elliott, and Oegg (2007, p. 108).
In view of these difficulties in identifying the domestic costs of sanctions, empirical
studies typically follow, to the extent they address this issue at all, a two-step approach to
examine the impact of sanctions on the sender's economy. In a first step, the effect of
sanctions on the targeted economic activity is analyzed. Specifically, since sanctions aim to
restrict cross-border interactions, the decline in business with the sanctioned country is
quantified, often with a strong focus on bilateral trade. In a second step, based on this
estimate, the economic loss to the sanctioning country is calculated. Hufbauer, Elliott, Cyrus,
and Winston (1997), for example, examine the costs of unilateral economic sanctions by the
United States and estimate that the sanctions may have reduced the country's exports to 26
target countries by about 15-19 billion US dollars in 1995. Assuming, then, that 1 billion US
dollars of exports supported about 13,800 jobs and that there was no offsetting increase in
exports to other markets, they argue that this drop translated into a reduction of about
200,000-260,000 jobs. Moreover, since jobs in the export sector pay relatively high wages,
they estimate that workers probably lost about 0.8-1.0 billion US dollars in export sector wage
premiums.
In this paper, we assess the costs of financial sanctions on the imposing country in
more detail. In particular, we examine the effects of financial sanctions on German non-
financial entities over the period from 1999 through 2014. During this time, Germany newly
6 A copy of the ad is available on the association's website at
http://www.nam.org/Issues/Trade/NAM-Chamber-Ad.pdf.
3
imposed restrictive financial measures on 23 countries, most of which are still in place. More
notably, using highly disaggregated, monthly data from the German balance of payments
statistics, we are able to identify business units that declared financial transactions with
sanctioned countries and, therefore, can be assumed to have been directly affected by the
measures. As we are interested in identifying the costs of sanctions beyond the reduction in
bilateral financial flows, we focus our analysis on German non-financial declarants. To the
extent that financial restrictions have any measurable effect on the economic performance of
individual declarants, these effects should be particularly observable for non-financial
business entities. For German banks and insurance companies, in contrast, with their large-
scale financial operations in major national and international markets, the reduction in
business opportunities due to sanctions policies is expected to have generally limited
consequences on their overall activities.7
We examine the impact of financial sanctions on domestic businesses along various
lines. We begin with an analysis of the direct costs of sanctions in terms of cross-border
business that is lost. More specifically, we apply a differences-in-differences approach to
study changes in German bilateral capital flows with the sanctioned country after the
imposition of sanctions. Besedes, Goldbach and Nitsch (2017) find a strong and immediate
decline in cross-border activities with the target country at both the extensive and intensive
margins; they estimate, for instance, that after the imposition of financial sanctions German
capital flows with the sanctioned country decrease by about 50 percent. When we decompose
the effect by the type of declarant, however, we find that the decline in financial flows is
dominated by a reduction in foreign activities by German financial institutions. For non-
financials, in contrast, the reduction in cross-border business with sanctioned countries is
mainly driven by a decline in the scope of activities (i.e., the extensive margin) while the
results for total financial flows (i.e., the intensive margin) turn out to be less robust.
Next, we characterize non-financial firms affected by sanctions in more detail. With
only few exceptions (e.g., Russia), restrictive financial measures have been primarily imposed
on countries of small, even tiny, importance for Germany as counterparts in financial
7 Buch and Lipponer (2004) provide a detailed empirical assessment of the international
activities of German banks. According to their findings, German banks operating abroad
typically expand their business either to realize economies of scale, with particularly strong
engagements in OECD countries and major international financial centers, or to reap
diversification benefits, reporting payments to (or from) a large portfolio of countries. In
either case, business with sanctioned countries is of minor importance for a bank's overall
performance.
4
transactions. Consequently, it is perhaps not surprising that German firms that declared
financial transactions with sanctioned countries turn out to be disproportionately large and
generally very active in (many) international markets ­ a finding that is in line with the
literature on firm-level exports.8 As a result, firms affected by sanctions are expected to have
various outside options in response to newly-imposed restrictions.
Our micro data also enable us to explore the response of sanctions-affected declarants
directly. In particular, we aim to identify possible sanctions evasion behavior by non-financial
reporting units. We find that German firms which declared activities with sanctioned
countries in the 12 months before restrictive measures were imposed sizably expand their
activities with other countries, some of which display close trade ties to the sanctioned
country, potentially indicating sanctions evasion behavior.
Finally, we examine the impact of sanctions on firm-level variables such as total sales
and the number of employees. If financial sanctions have any severe consequences for the
sanctioning country's economy, as argued, for instance, by national business associations, the
costs of sanctions should be observable in these measures. However, the business
performance of firms affected by sanctions is not measurably different from that of firms
doing business only with non-sanctioned countries. Overall, we find consistent evidence that
the costs of financial sanctions on the German economy are, if anything, moderate.
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 reviews some relevant
aspects of sanctions and sanction policies, followed by a description of our data. In Section 4,
we follow standard practices and examine the effect of financial sanctions on cross-border
activities. We then make explicit use of the firm-level dimension of our data set and
characterize German non-financial declarants that report business with sanctioned countries in
Section 5. In Section 6, we explore firm-level responses to the imposition of sanctions, while
Section 7 focuses on the effects of sanctions on aggregate measures of firm performance.
Finally, Section 8 provides some concluding comments.
8 See, for instance, Bernard, Jensen, Redding, and Schott (2017), Table 5.
5
2. Financial Sanctions in the European Union
In the European Union (EU), where member states have committed themselves to a
Common Foreign and Security Policy, foreign policy instruments are (typically) imposed by
the Council of the EU. Among the instruments for external action, financial sanctions became
available to EU authorities in 1994. At this time, the Treaty of Maastricht entered into force,
which introduced the free movement of capital as a Treaty freedom. Today, Article 63 of the
Treaty of the Functioning of the European Union (TFEU) prohibits all restrictions on
payments and the movement of capital between member states and between member states
and third countries, while Article 215 TFEU allows for the interruption or reduction, in part or
completely, of economic and financial relations with one or more third countries.
For our purposes, two features of sanction policies in the European Union are
particularly noteworthy. First, while the Council acts by qualified majority, making it
difficult, if not impossible, for a single country to veto proposed legislation, regulations are
directly applicable in all EU member states and binding in their entirety. As a result, there is
only limited scope for potential concerns of endogeneity, where the decision to impose
restrictive measures is affected by their expected domestic costs. Still, as the EU implements
sanctions either autonomously, at the EU level, or as a result of resolutions of the Security
Council of the United Nations (UN), we check for robustness by examining UN sanctions
only.
Second, the EU adopts, in practice, a wide range of restrictive measures. These
measures often target specific activities; they also include, for instance, restrictions on non-
financial activities such as trade embargoes and travel bans. The overwhelming majority of
such measures, however, directly and/or indirectly affects cross-border financial relations and
is, therefore, also officially recorded as a financial sanction (which is the policy instrument of
our interest). Embargoes on exports of specific types of goods, for instance, typically involve
restrictions on technical assistance, training and financing; travel bans on named individuals
are often accompanied by other restrictive measures, such as the freezing of funds and
financial assets. The measures are also regularly reviewed and frequently adjusted. Besedes,
Goldbach and Nitsch (2017), for instance, use this information to also examine the effects of
the strength, and changes in the strength (i.e., tightening and loosening), of sanctions on cross-
border capital flows. In this paper, to save space, we generally limit our attention to the
distinction whether a country is sanctioned or not.
6
3. Data
Our analysis is based on two confidential micro data sets from the Deutsche
Bundesbank. Given the sensitivity of the business information involved, the data are only
accessible, often in anonymized form, at the headquarters of the Bundesbank in Frankfurt,
Germany.
We use the Deutsche Bundesbank's balance of payments statistics as our main source
of data. This register contains detailed information on financial transactions between
Germany and the rest of the world and has, for our purposes, at least two notable advantages.
First, the data set is complete; all individuals, firms and financial institutions located in
Germany are required to report cross-border payments in excess of 12,500 euros to the
Deutsche Bundesbank, allowing the central bank to compile the monthly balance of payments
statistics.9 Second, the register collects information on various transaction features, including
the name and the address of the reporting unit, thereby allowing us to identify cross-border
financial activities of non-financial declarants.10 In addition, for each single declaration, the
value and the partner country of the transaction are provided as well as information on the
type of asset that is transferred (bonds, commercial paper, stocks, investment certificate,
equity capital, credit and other capital).11 Hence, although the frequency of the data is
monthly, with information provided at the end of the month, the data is effectively close to the
level of the individual transaction.
In contrast to Besedes, Goldbach and Nitsch (2017), however, we do not use the full
sample of balance of payments entries available to us, but, aiming to assess the domestic
(economic) costs of sanctions, focus our attention exclusively on transactions of non-financial
declarants. Consequently, we exclude cross-border financial flows reported by financial
institutions, many of them of considerable magnitude, which implies a loss of 4,364
declarants out of a total of 47,674 reporting units. We also deviate from Besedes, Goldbach
9 See Section 67 of the Foreign Trade and Payments Ordinance
(Außenwirtschaftsverordnung), available at
http://www.bmwi.de/Redaktion/DE/Downloads/A/awv-englisch.html.
10 Cross-border transactions by households and individuals are typically declared by the
financial institution that handles the transfer.
11 For a few types of transactions, exemptions exist such that there is no declaration
necessary; these exemptions are: payments below the threshold of 12,500 euro, payments
related to the export and import of goods, (re-)payments related to short-term (duration of less
than 12 months) loans, paid short-term deposits to foreign monetary institutions and payments
which are forwarded to other foreigners.
7
and Nitsch (2017) in analyzing more years of data. Our sample covers the period from
January 1999 to December 2014.
The second source of information that we use is the corporate balance sheets database
of the Bundesbank, Ustan. The Bundesbank has collected, for various purposes, extensive
data on individual firms. The data are often taken from financial statements, but may also
have been obtained from a mandatory questionnaire that covers the firms' balance sheet and
profit and loss accounts data. Most notably for our purposes, the database contains
information on firm characteristics that are not included in the balance of payments data (such
as firm employment or sales).12
The corporate balance sheets data are available on an annual basis. We merge the data
with our information from the balance of payments data by the corresponding year (such that
annual firm data is matched with the monthly transactions data in each of the twelve months
in a given year). As the firm identifiers are not identical for the two data sets, we apply a
propensity score string matching algorithm, based on the name of the firm, its address and its
legal form, to link the two data sets. Schild, Schultz, and Wieser (2017) provide a detailed
discussion of the matching methodology and the quality of the match; see also Appendix 1.
Information on financial sanctions is mainly obtained from the service center
`Financial Sanctions' of the Deutsche Bundesbank.13 This unit, which is responsible for the
implementation of European Union Regulations on financial sanctions in Germany, provides
a compilation of executive orders and disseminates relevant information to interested parties
and the wider public. We augment this data with additional information from official
European Union sources.14
During our sample period, financial sanctions have been newly imposed on
23 countries. Table 1 provides a list of countries along with a brief description of the
measures taken.15 As shown, almost all target countries are economically small and/or poorly
developed. More importantly, they are often of tiny importance for the international financial
12 For a more detailed description, see
https://www.bundesbank.de/Redaktion/EN/Standardartikel/Bundesbank/Research_Centre/rese
arch_data_micro_data_ustan.html.
13 See
http://www.bundesbank.de/Navigation/EN/Service/Financial_sanctions/financial_sanctions.html.
14 Common Foreign and Security Policy Decisions and European Union Regulations are
published in the Official Journal of the EU; see http://eur-lex.europa.eu/homepage.html.
15 The table has been updated and extended from Besedes, Goldbach and Nitsch (2017).
8
business relationships of German non-financial companies. As shown in Figure 1, to the
extent any (direct) financial activities are reported, the target countries typically account, with
few exceptions, for less than 0.01 percent of cross-border capital flows by German non-
financials.
Sanctions are applied instantaneously, such that there is no time lag between the date
of announcement of a sanction and its enforcement. In our empirical analysis, with balance of
payments data at monthly frequency, we code sanctions imposed after the middle of the
month as being effective from the beginning of the following month. For two target countries,
Uzbekistan and the Comoros, the sanctions have also been lifted again completely during our
sample period. However, as German non-financial entities do not declare any financial
business with the Comoros, these episodes of a (reverse) switch in sanction status are
ignored.16
In Table 2, we describe our financial data in more detail. As noted above, the raw data
are highly disaggregated, with separate statistical entries in a given month for each feature of
a transaction. Therefore, in order to partly reduce the complexity of the data, the table reviews
data at the country-month level, our main unit of analysis. Descriptive statistics are presented
for both the full sample of available observations, and for transactions under sanction, along
with a p-value for a t-test of equality of means.
Table 2 illustrates the various features and dimensions of our (raw) balance of
payments data. For each country-month pair in our sample, there are, on average, about 33
separate entries of cross-border financial activities; each entry refers to a capital flow activity
(inflow or outflow) in one of nine asset categories by a single German non-financial reporting
unit (or declarant). Overall, there is broad trading activity which is particularly concentrated
in credit, equity capital and direct investment credit.17
More interestingly, and perhaps not surprisingly, given the irrelevance of many
sanction targets as a financial partner noted above, bilateral financial interactions with
sanctioned countries are rare; sanction episodes account for only 4 percent of our sample (of
country-month pairs). Also, capital flows under sanctions are, on average, of smaller,
16 Besedes, Goldbach and Nitsch (2017) use these episodes to replicate their analysis for the
removal (instead of the imposition) of sanctions, without new insights.
17 Once the sample is expanded to also include financial institutions and insurance companies,
financial flows are dominated by trading activities in bonds and stocks; see Besedes,
Goldbach and Nitsch (2017).
9
although still sizable, magnitude.18 There are fewer balance of payments `transactions',
reported by a smaller number of declarants and involving fewer asset classes, potentially
already reflecting greater administrative hurdles due to the imposition of financial sanctions.
4. Business with Sanctioned Countries
We begin our empirical analysis of the domestic costs of sanctions by examining the
effect of sanctions on the targeted economic activity. Since financial sanctions typically put
restrictions on cross-border financial interactions, we apply a differences-in-differences
approach to analyze how financial flows declared by German non-financial entities to/from
sanctioned countries have changed after the imposition of sanctions. More specifically, we
estimate variants of the following model:
(1) Log(Flowct
) =  +  Sanctionsct
{+ Xct
} + c
+ t
+ ct
where Flowct
is a measure of German financial activity with country c at time t, Sanctionsct
is
an indicator variable that takes the value of one when financial sanctions are imposed (and is
zero otherwise), Xct
is a vector of auxiliary control variables, and we include a full set of
country-specific (c
) and time-specific (t
) fixed effects. The coefficient of interest to us is ,
which measures the effect of sanctions on cross-border financial activities; a negative and
significant coefficient indicates that the adoption of sanctions is associated with fewer
financial interactions between German non-financial declarants and their foreign counterparts,
ceteris paribus. Throughout the analysis, we estimate regressions with OLS and apply cluster-
robust Huber-White standard errors. Also, we analyze the data at the country-month level to
reduce the amount of noise, and especially the number of zero observations (i.e., observations
of no flows), in the raw data.19
18 As noted above, restrictive measures are typically tailored in order to promote the desired
outcome; they do not prohibit automatically all business dealings with a sanctioned country.
For the EU's description of best practices for the effective implementation of restrictive
measures, see http://eeas.europa.eu/archives/docs/cfsp/sanctions/docs/index_en.pdf.
19 As we examine a balanced sample, the analysis of more disaggregated data inflates the size
of the panel dramatically.
10
We use four different variables to measure the intensity of bilateral financial
interactions between Germany and countries (or, more precisely, territories) in the rest of the
world: (1) the total value of bilateral capital flows (defined as the sum of inflows and
outflows), (2) the value of gross capital inflows, (3) the value of gross capital outflows, and
(4) the net value of bilateral capital flows (defined as outflows minus inflows). For us, none of
the measures is obviously superior to any other, although we put perhaps somewhat less
emphasis on the estimation results for net financial flows. We also experiment with adding
further control variables to the baseline fixed effects differences-in-differences specification,
at the costs of a (much) smaller sample size.
Table 3 reports the results. Columns (1) to (4) of the table present the estimates from
the parsimonious specification of equation (1) which only includes, in addition to our variable
of interest, the sanctions dummy, two sets of fixed effects. In this specification, all time-
invariant influences on German financial flows with a country (such as, for instance, the
partner's geographic distance from Germany) are accounted for by country fixed effects,
while a comprehensive set of time fixed effects captures monthly variations in capital flows
common to all partners. As shown, the point estimates of  are consistently negative and, with
a value of about -0.8, of about the same magnitude as found in Besedes, Goldbach and Nitsch
(2017) who analyze a shorter but more comprehensive sample of German cross-border
financial flows (covering, in addition, declarations by German financial institutions and
insurance companies). Taken at face value, the point estimates of  imply that capital flows
by German non-financial businesses with target countries of sanctions decrease, on average,
by about 55 percent (exp(-0.8)-1) after the imposition of financial sanctions which seems
economically plausible. In comparison to Besedes, Goldbach and Nitsch (2017), however, the
statistical precision of the estimated effects is considerably lower. Only one of the four
coefficients is estimated at the 5 percent level of statistical significance, while the remaining
three coefficients are marginally significant at the 10 percent level. As a result, the activities
of German non-financial entities seem to be less clearly affected by financial sanctions than
the business activities of financial declarants.
This finding is confirmed when we additionally control for standard determinants of
bilateral financial flows (such as the partner country's stock market capitalization).20 Columns
(5) to (8) of Table 3 tabulate the results from the augmented model of equation (1). In fact,
with this extension, our estimates of  decrease in magnitude by about one-half and become
20 See Forbes and Warnock (2012).
11
statistically indifferent from zero at any conventional level of confidence. Part of the decline
in the estimated sanctions effect is explained by time-varying country-specific features. A
country's overall financial openness, for instance, turns out to be, as expected, positively
associated with German capital flows and is likely to decline under sanctions. The results are
also affected, however, by the considerably reduced sample size. As some control variables
are only available for a limited number of countries, our sample is effectively reduced to
cover only seven (of 23) sanctions episodes. For these episodes, then, which contain the
economically more relevant markets from the list of sanctioned countries, there is hardly any
measurable effect of sanctions on the cross-border capital flows of German non-financial
declarants identifiable. When we reestimate, for the restricted sample, the parsimonious
specification of equation (1), the estimated  coefficient is of (borderline) statistical
significance for only two measures of cross-border financial activity (total flows and net
flows).21,22
In Table 4, we expand our analysis to cover not only the value of financial flows but
also other quantitative features of Germany's bilateral financial relationship with a country. In
particular, we decompose aggregate financial flows with a partner into various (contributing)
factors (such as the number of German reporting units that actually declare financial
transactions with the country) and estimate the sanctions effect for these factors separately.
The results of these decomposition exercises are reported in Table 4. As before, we
experiment with various specifications of equation (1). However, to save space, we only
report estimates for the coefficient of interest, ; that is, each cell in the table contains the
results of a separate regression. The regressand is tabulated in the first column on the left of
the table; the remaining eight columns correspond to the specifications of equation (1) in
Table 3 (including additional country controls for columns (5)-(8)). For comparison, the first
row of Table 4 replicates the results for the value of financial flows shown in the first row of
Table 3.
Reviewing the results, the sanctions effect varies sizably by type of margin.
Specifically, for measures of the extensive margin of a bilateral financial relationship (such
21 Results are available on request.
22 Instead of controlling for determinants of cross-border financial flows, it may also be
reasonable to restrict the analysis to a homogeneous group of countries. When we analyze a
sample that only includes countries with a per capita income below that of the sanctioned
country with the highest per capita income (Russia), our baseline results remain qualitatively
unchanged.
12
as, for instance, the number of German reporting units that declare financial activities with a
country in a given month), the estimated  coefficients take consistently negative and
statistically significant values. In particular, our point estimates imply a decline in the number
of declarants, depending on specification, by between 26 and 32 percent, while somewhat
larger effects are observed for the number of statistical entries in the balance of payments.
More notably, this finding is largely unaffected when we extend our specification to include
additional control variables. As shown in columns (5) to (8), the coefficients even tend to
increase in magnitude with this extension. In contrast to our findings for the intensive margin,
these results indicate a measurable decline in financial activities with sanctioned countries
after the imposition of sanctions.
A reasonable explanation for the discrepancy in our findings for the effects of
sanctions along the intensive and the extensive margin is that `smart' sanctions are, indeed,
smart. To be more precise, financial restrictions may induce a reduction, or maybe even a
complete elimination, of targeted economic activities, while hardly affecting Germany's
overall financial relationship with a sanctioned country. Consequently, they do not cause
collateral damage.
Table 5 explores this hypothesis in more detail. In this table, we return to our analysis
of the value of aggregate financial flows but now split the sanctions dummy by the size of the
partner country's market as proxied by the number of German entities declaring financial
activities with a country; that is, instead of a single indicator variable for the application of
financial sanctions, we now use two variables to identify sanctions episodes.23 In particular,
we hypothesize that financial restrictions have a larger effect on aggregate financial flows if
they are imposed on countries in which only few German declarants report activities, while a
withdrawal of some declarants may have basically no effect in markets with many German
participants. As shown, the results indeed differ notably by market size. For small markets,
for which the number of German declarants is below the median, the value of capital flows
consistently declines after the imposition of sanctions, while the effect is statistically
indifferent from zero for large markets. In sum, financial sanctions measurably restrict the
23 For each sanctions episode, we count the number of German declarants that report financial
activities with the target country in the twelve months before the imposition of the sanction
and, then, split the sample in half to identify, according to this measure, large and small target
countries. We also experiment, in unreported results, with other measures of market size, such
as a country's GDP, obtaining qualitatively similar findings. In line with our approach, Eaton,
Kortum, and Kramarz (2011) document, for French firms, that the number of firms selling to
a market increases with the size of the market.
13
financial activities of German non-financial declarants with the target country. However,
except for target countries of (very) limited economic importance for German non-financials,
there is no significant decline in overall business activity with the target country identifiable.
5. Firms Facing Sanctions
An implicit assumption in reduced-form assessments of the domestic costs of
sanctions is that financial restrictions affect all internationally active firms in similar fashion.
Firms reporting business with sanctioned countries, however, may be systematically different
from other declarants, potentially affecting their ability to cope with restrictions. Therefore,
we next describe German non-financial entities that report cross-border capital flows with a
sanctioned country in more detail. To do so, we construct, from the balance of payments,
measures of the extent of a firm's monthly cross-border financial activities and estimate
regressions of the form:
(2) log(FirmActivity)it
=  +  SanctionedFirmit
{+ Zit
} + t
+ it
where FirmActivityit
is a measure of declarant i's aggregate cross-border financial activity at
time t, SanctionedFirmit
is an indicator variable that takes the value of one when declarant i
faces sanctions on (part of) its business at time t (and is zero otherwise), Z is a vector of
auxiliary control variables, and we include a full set of time-specific (t
) fixed effects. Our
unit of observation for this exercise is a firm-month pair; that is, we compute, for each firm in
our sample, a measure of the firm's business activities at a given point in time, and compare
firms that declare activities with at least one country under sanctions with firms only reporting
transactions with non-sanctioned countries, holding constant for other factors. To the extent
there is any systematic difference between the firms identifiable, this difference will be
captured by , the estimated coefficient on our variable of interest.
As before, we proceed sequentially. We begin our analysis with a measure of how
active a non-financial entity is in cross-border financial business as proxied by the log number
of entries in the balance of payments statistics by a declarant in a given month (i.e., the firm-
asset-country triplet). The results are reported in the first column in Table 6. The estimated
14
coefficient on the sanctions dummy is positive and statistically significant, indicating that
non-financial declarants hit by sanctions tend to report a disproportionately large number of
activities with countries worldwide. The point estimate of 1.3 indicates that firms affected by
sanctions report, on average, 130 percent more cross-border financial transactions, measured
by the number of country-asset pair entries in the balance of payments, than other declarants.
Moreover, columns (2) to (4) show that this result remains qualitatively unchanged when we
include additional control variables. In particular, we successively add (1) a comprehensive
set of sector fixed effects to control for any industry-specific factors that may affect a firm's
cross-border financial activity, (2) the total value of a firm's capital flows to control for firm
size, and (3) the number of the firm's international markets that are under sanctions. While
sector fixed effects and a firm's total cross-border flows explain part of the difference
between entities operating under sanctions and other declarants, sanction-affected entities are
still disproportionately more active in international markets, with the effect getting stronger
the larger the number of sanctioned markets for which an entity reports business activities.
Similarly, the results also hold for a balanced sample, which also includes (previously
dropped) observations of zero cross-border activity, as shown in columns (5) to (8).24
In Table 7, we experiment with other measures of firm activity, including firm
characteristics taken from the corporate balance sheets database (such as employment and
sales), without much effect on our main findings. Non-financial entities with activities in
sanctioned countries are significantly larger than other declarants, by approximately 40
percent for both employment and sales. Firms which are active in sanctioned markets also
have more total assets, and they are more productive.
In sum, we conclude that financial sanctions predominantly affect non-financial
declarants with a wide range of domestic and international business activities and, therefore,
considerable outside options. For a proper assessment of the domestic costs of sanctions, this
empirical finding, which is unobservable from the analysis of aggregate data, may be of
particular relevance.
6. Responses to Sanctions
In view of the outside business opportunities, we next examine how German non-
financial declarants respond to the imposition of sanctions. To analyze this issue, we make
24 Following standard practice, we add the value of 1 to our measure of firm activity, the
number of firm-asset-partner triplets, to allow for log-linearization of this variable.
15
explicit use of our granular data that allow us to observe cross-border financial activities by
individual declarant. In particular, we perform a two-step procedure. In a first step, we
identify German reporting units which declared financial activities with sanctioned countries
in the period of 12 months before restrictive measures were imposed. These declarants are
classified as firms affected by sanctions.25 Then, based on this information, we analyze
differences in the activities between declarants affected (or `treated') by sanctions and
declarants without any business operations with target countries, examining firm activities
with non-sanctioned countries only. We hypothesize that any systematic variation over time in
the size and scope of financial activities with non-sanctioned countries between the two
groups of declarants can be interpreted as evidence of business responses related to the
imposition of sanctions. Specifically, we estimate equations of the form:
(3) Log(Flowi
ct
) =  +  AffectedFirmi
ct
{+ Xct
} + i
c
+ t
+ ct
where Flowi
ct
is a measure of German financial activity of declarant i with country c at time t,
AffectedFirmi
ct
is an indicator variable that takes the value of one when a declarant reported
business operations with a target country of sanctions in the 12 months before sanctions were
imposed (and is zero otherwise), X is a vector of auxiliary control variables, and we include
full sets of declarant-country-specific (i
c
) and time-specific (t
) fixed effects. In our
empirical setting in which we focus exclusively on a sample of non-sanctioned countries and,
therefore, ignore the direct effects of sanctions, the estimate of  indicates the extent to which
financial activities of treated reporting units with a given country deviate from the activities of
other declarants after the treated units have been exposed to the treatment (i.e, they suffer
from the imposition of sanctions on a third country).
Table 8 presents the results. The table is constructed analogously to our benchmark
analysis of cross-border financial flows (Table 3); that is, we report estimates for our four
measures of bilateral capital flows, using both a highly parsimonious specification of equation
(3), with results being tabulated in columns (1)-(4) of the table, as well as a more demanding
specification with additional control variables, for which the results are tabulated in columns
25 A time window of 12 months before the imposition of sanctions allows us to ignore
possible seasonal variation in financial activities. However, when we experiment with other
time windows to identify sanctions-affected firms, we obtain very similar results.
16
(5)-(8). As before, the number of observations declines as the number of regressors increases
because of missing country data. However, the drop in sample size turns out to be somewhat
less pronounced for the analysis of firm-level data. Moreover, to the extent the control
variables take significant coefficients, the results are reasonable and intuitive. Most notably,
the effect of this modification on the main results is negligible, in contrast to our baseline
findings above.
Turning to the variable of interest, the estimates of  are consistently positive and
economically and statistically significant. Often, the t-statistic is close to ten. This finding
suggests that German declarants affected by sanctions policies indeed turn out to be highly
flexible in adjusting their business patterns, successfully exploring alternative business
opportunities. According to our point estimates, treated declarants expand their activities with
other (non-sanctioned) countries relative to German declarants unaffected by financial
sanctions by 35 to 55 percent, depending on specification.
Another possible interpretation that is consistent with our empirical findings, however,
is that declarants, instead of opening up new markets, simply continue business operations
with target countries, via extended transactions with third countries. Consequently, sanctions
would be largely ineffective because affected declarants circumvent the restrictions by using
third countries as intermediaries.
Unfortunately, our data does not allow us to directly distinguish between these two
different interpretations of the observed increase in third-country capital flows by sanctions-
affected German declarants.26 However, we are able to identify possible circumvention
behavior. In particular, it is argued that circumvention of sanctions becomes more difficult the
more countries impose them. As sanctions in our sample are imposed either by the European
Union or by the entire United Nations, we expect to find evidence of circumvention, if
anything, for sanctions imposed by the European Union alone. Further, it is assumed that
countries which are economically close to the target countries of sanctions are the countries
which may be more likely to serve as an intermediary.27 Therefore, we identify a target
26 The main restriction is our limited access to data, covering detailed balance of payments
information from only a single source country, Germany.
27 Besedes, Goldbach and Nitsch (2017) also examine other potential intermediaries for the
circumvention of financial sanctions, such as offshore financial centers. However, for this
group of countries and territories, the results are much less conclusive.
17
country's five largest trading partners in the 12 months before the imposition of sanctions.28
Specifically, we argue that a relative increase in the financial relationships of sanction-
`treated' units with countries which are major trading partners of sanctioned countries can be
interpreted as evidence of circumvention.29
Estimation results are contained in Table 9. In contrast to our previous analysis, in
which we use a single variable to describe the cross-border financial activities of German
non-financial declarants affected by the imposition of sanctions relative to reporting units
unaffected by sanctions, we now use six measures; these measures differentiate between the
scope of sanctions (EU, UN) and the destination of third-country capital flows (top 5 trading
partners of the target country, rest of the world), respectively. In combination, the results are
indicative of circumvention behavior. Two findings are particularly noteworthy. First, for
sanctions which have been imposed by the European Union alone, the estimated coefficients
on the interaction terms (EU sanctions × destination) consistently take positive and significant
values. As a result, third-country capital flows of German declarants affected by EU sanctions
have, on average, sizably increased in relative terms. More importantly, the coefficients are
larger, in both a statistical and an economic sense, for financial transactions with countries
with close economic ties with sanctioned countries. Depending on the flow and regression
specification, the point estimates imply that business with the largest trading partners of
sanctioned countries increased by about 80 to 120 percent whereas business with all other
countries expanded by only about 30 to 60 percent. This notable difference in the geographic
diversification of financial activities, holding constant for other factors, is suggestive of the
possibility of circumvention behavior by sanctions-affected German declarants. Second, for
UN sanctions, we obtain very different results. For these sanctions, which are (by definition)
broader in geographic scope, transactions of affected firms increase, if anything, only for
countries other than the major trading partners of target countries. As there is a priori no
reason to expect a difference in patterns of geographic readjustment of financial activities by
type of sanction, we argue, in line with Besedes, Goldbach and Nitsch (2017), that this finding
provides further evidence of efforts by affected declarants to circumvent financial sanctions.
28 Monthly data on bilateral values of trade between countries are obtained from the
International Monetary Fund's Direction of Trade Statistics. We compute a country's trade
shares based on the sum of exports and imports.
29 Circumvention does not necessarily imply that a sanctions regime is violated. Due to the
administrative burden associated with sanctions, for instance, declarants also have a
reasonable incentive to reroute legal activities.
18
In sum, we conclude that, in response to sanctions, affected firms expand their
business with non-sanctioned countries. Especially for sanctions imposed by the EU alone,
there is indirect evidence that firms manage to continue their business operations with the
target countries via non-sanctioned countries which display close trade ties to the sanctioned
country and, therefore, serve as intermediaries.
7. Sanctions and Firm Performance
In a final exercise, we examine the overall costs of sanctions on domestic businesses.
In view of the frequent and widespread opposition of industry groups and business leaders to
sanction policies, emphasizing the loss in foreign business opportunities associated with such
policy measures, the restrictions are expected to (also) have measurable negative
consequences for the domestic economy, at least at the firm level. Therefore, we ask: Do
German non-financial declarants affected by sanctions experience an identifiable decline in
firm performance?
We analyze this issue by estimating regressions of the form:
(4) log(FirmPerformance)it
=  +  AffectedSanctionedFirmit
+ i
+ t
+ it
where FirmPerformanceit
is a measure of declarant i's overall economic performance at time t,
AffectedSanctionedFirmit
is an indicator variable that takes the value of one when declarant i
reports business with a sanctioned country within 12 months before the imposition of
sanctions or after the imposition of sanctions (and is zero otherwise), and we include a full set
of firm-specific (i
) and time-specific (t
) fixed effects. In this differences-in-differences
setting, to the extent that sanctions have any measurable effect on German non-financial
entities, we expect the estimate of  to be negative and significant, indicating that firm
performance worsens after the imposition of sanctions, holding constant for other
(unobserved) firm features. As our data on firm characteristics are of annual frequency, we
focus, in our baseline specification, on the contemporaneous association between sanctions
and firm performance. Also, we jointly analyze the effects of sanctions on declarants that are
affected by sanctions (because they reported business operations with a sanctioned country in
19
the 12 months before sanctions were imposed) and declarants that (continue to) operate under
sanctions since a firm's activities may have been reduced or eliminated completely due to the
imposition of restrictions.
Table 10 presents the results. As before, we experiment with a wide range of firm
characteristics. Each column of the table reports the results of a separate regression, with the
regressand tabulated in the first line. We begin, in column (1), with a model specification in
which firm performance is proxied by the number of employees. In particular, we argue that
the size of the workforce is probably the most comprehensive measure of a firm's economic
adjustment costs to a sanctions environment. For firm employment as dependent variable,
however, the point estimate of , although negative, is economically small and statistically
indistinguishable from zero. Taken at face value, this finding indicates that there is no
measurable association between sanctions and firm performance. According to our estimation
result, sanctions-affected firms do not change their labor force in response to sanctions. Still,
adjustments in employment may be generally difficult, especially in the short term, due to
German labor market regulations. Therefore, we next analyze a potentially more sensitive
performance measure, a firm's total sales. As shown in column (2), for this regressand, the
point estimate of  slightly increases in magnitude, but we obtain qualitatively similar
estimation results. In line with our (weak) findings for the effects of sanctions on cross-border
financial activities along the intensive margin, there is no evidence of a sizable drop in overall
economic activity after the imposition of sanctions. Reassuringly, we note that this conclusion
also holds for all our other measures of firm performance. The estimation results for assets,
wages, capital intensity and productivity are tabulated in the remaining four columns of
Table 10.
We perform extensive robustness checks to confirm that the results are insensitive to
the exact regression specification.30 For instance, we lag the regressor of interest one year to
reduce possible simultaneity problems. We also estimate separate effects for firms affected by
sanctions (and discontinuing business with the sanctioned country) and firms that still declare
activities under sanctions. In none of these changes, however, the estimate of  takes a value
that is statistically different from zero. As there is no observable difference in the business
performance of German firms that either currently declare or previously have declared or
never have declared transactions with a sanctioned country, we conclude that the domestic
costs of financial sanctions at the firm level are negligible.
30 In order to save space, we do not report the results.
20
8. Conclusions
Sanctions are meant to hurt! By restricting a country's access to international markets,
they impose costs on the foreign government, with the ultimate aim of inducing a fundamental
change in the government's policies. At the same time, however, a reduction in cross-border
business also implies costs for the domestic economy. In fact, given the sanctioning country's
demonstrated willingness to bear the economic burden associated with such measures,
sanctions are widely considered to be a particularly powerful tool of diplomacy.
In this paper, we complement the sizable literature on the effects of sanctions on the
target country by examining the economic costs of sanctions for the sanctioning country. In
particular, we use detailed data from the German balance of payments statistics to analyze the
effects of financial sanctions on German non-financial entities over the period from 1999
through 2014. During this time, Germany imposed, due to its international obligations as a
member state of the United Nations and the European Union, restrictive financial measures on
23 countries.
We find a measurable decline in Germany's financial activities with the sanctioned
country after the imposition of sanctions. For non-financial entities, however, the reduction in
cross-border business is mainly along the extensive margin, while the (negative) effect on
financial flows, the intensive margin, is less precisely estimated, as one would expect for
diplomatic attempts to `target' sanctions on specific individuals, groups, entities and
activities. More notably, our data set allows us to identify entities that declared business with
the sanctioned country and, therefore, can be assumed to be directly affected by the restrictive
measures. These entities are not only found to be more active in international markets,
providing them with numerous outside options to deal with the decline in business with the
sanctioned country, there is also consistent evidence that they make use of such options,
significantly expanding their business operations with non-sanctioned countries. As a result, it
is unsurprising that we find no sanctions effect on aggregate indicators of firm-level activity,
such as employment or sales. Overall, we conclude that sanctions have, at most, limited
economic consequences for the sanctioning country.
References:
Bernard, Andrew B., J. Bradford Jensen, Stephen J. Redding and Peter K. Schott. 2017.
"Global Firms," Journal of Economic Literature. (forthcoming).
21
Besedes, Tibor, Stefan Goldbach, and Volker Nitsch. 2017. "You're Banned! The Effect of
Sanctions on German Cross-Border Financial Flows," Economic Policy. 32 (April): 263-318.
Biersteker, Thomas, Sue E. Eckert, Marcos Tourinho, and Zuzana Hudáková. 2013. The
Effectiveness of United Nations Targeted Sanctions. Geneva: Targeted Sanctions Consortium.
Buch, Claudia M. and Alexander Lipponer. 2004. "FDI Versus Cross-Border Financial
Services: The Globalisation of German Banks," Deutsche Bundesbank Discussion Paper
05/2004.
Eaton, Jonathan, Samuel Kortum, and Francis Kramarz. 2011. "An Anatomy of International
Trade: Evidence from French Firms," Econometrica. 79 (September): 1453-1498.
Forbes, Kristin and Francis Warnock. 2012. "Capital Flow Waves: Surges, Stops, Flight, and
Re-trenchment," Journal of International Economics. 88 (November): 235-251.
Hufbauer, Gary Clyde, Kimberly Ann Elliott, Tess Cyrus, and Elizabeth Winston. 1997. "US
Economic Sanctions: Their Impact on Trade, Jobs, and Wages," Institute for International
Economics Working Paper.
Hufbauer, Gary Clyde, Jeffrey J. Schott, Kimberly Ann Elliott, and Barbara Oegg. 2007.
Economic Sanctions Reconsidered, 3rd Edition. Washington, DC: Institute for International
Economics.
Kaempfer, William H. and Anton D. Lowenberg. 2007. "The Political Economy of Economic
Sanctions,"in Todd Sandler and Keith Hartley (eds.) Handbook of Defense Economics,
Volume 2. Amsterdam: Elsevier.
Levy, Philip. 1999. "Sanctions on South Africa: What Did They Do?," American Economic
Review. 89 (May): 415-420.
Masters, Jonathan. 2015. "What Are Economic Sanctions?," Council for Foreign Relations,
available at http://www.cfr.org/sanctions/economic-sanctions/p36259
Schild, Christopher-Johannes, Simone Schultz, and Franco Wieser. 2017. "Linking Deutsche
Bundesbank Company Data Using Machine-Learning-Based Classification," Technical
Report 2017-01, Deutsche Bundesbank Research Data and Service Center.
Figure 1: The Relevance of Sanctioned Countries for Cross-Border Capital Flows of
German Non-Financial Declarants
Source: Authors' calculations.
left
scale
right
scale
0 .2 .4 .6 .8 1
10-2 %
0 20 40 60 80 100
10-2 %
Russia
Myanmar
Iran
Egypt
Libya
Côte d'Ivoire
Liberia
Congo, DR
Tunisia
Uzbekistan
Belarus
Lebanon
Guinea
Zimbabwe
Afghanistan
Sudan
Guinea-Bissau
Syria
Iraq
Korea, DR
Eritrea
Somalia
Central Afr Rep
Comoros
1999
2014
Shares in German Capital Flows (Firms only)
22
23
Table 1: List of Financial Sanctions, 1999-2014
Country First announcement
(Lifted)
Measures taken
Myanmar 22 May 2000 Freezing of assets and economic resources
of natural persons and establishments;
export restriction on military equipment
Somalia 27 January 2003 Freezing of assets and economic resources
of natural persons and establishments;
export restriction on military equipment
Liberia 4 September 2003 Freezing of assets and economic resources
of natural persons and establishments;
export restriction on military equipment
Congo, Dem. Rep. 29 September 2003 Freezing of assets and economic resources
of natural persons and establishments
Sudan 26 January 2004 Freezing of assets and economic resources
of natural persons
Zimbabwe 19 February 2004 Freezing of assets and economic resources
of natural persons and establishments;
export restriction on military equipment
Côte d'Ivoire 31 January 2005 Freezing of assets and economic resources
of natural persons and establishments;
export restriction on military equipment
Uzbekistan 14 November 2005
(15 December 2009)
Export restriction on goods related to
nuclear technology
Lebanon 21 February 2006 Freezing of assets and economic resources
Belarus 18 May 2006 Freezing of assets and economic resources
of natural persons and establishments;
export restriction on military equipment
Iran 2 February 2007 Freezing of assets and economic resources
of natural persons and establishments;
export restriction on military equipment,
chemicals and other resources (gold, silver,
...)
Korea, Dem. Rep. 27 March 2007 Freezing of assets and economic resources
of natural persons and establishments;
export restriction on luxury goods and
goods related to nuclear technology
Comoros 17 March 2008
(24 July 2008)
Freezing of assets and economic resources
of natural persons
Guinea 22 December 2009 Freezing of assets and economic resources
of natural persons; export restriction on
military equipment
Eritrea 26 July 2010 Freezing of assets and economic resources;
export restriction on military equipment
Tunisia 4 February 2011 Freezing of assets and economic resources
of natural persons
Libya 2 March 2011 Freezing of assets and economic resources
of natural persons and establishments;
export restriction on military equipment
Egypt 21 March 2011 Freezing of assets and economic resources
of natural persons
Syria 9 May 2011 Freezing of assets and economic resources
of natural persons and establishments;
export restriction on military equipment,
chemicals and other resources (gold, silver,
...)
Afghanistan 1 August 2011 Freezing of assets and economic resources
24
of natural persons and establishments
Guinea-Bissau 3 May 2012 Freezing of assets and economic resources
of natural persons
Russia 5 March 2014 Freezing of assets and economic resources
of natural persons and establishments;
export restriction on oil drilling machinery,
chemicals and other natural resources
Central African Republic 10 March 2014 Freezing of assets and economic resources
of natural persons and establishments
Source: Deutsche Bundesbank, Service center `Financial Sanctions'.
25
Table 2: Descriptive Statistics
Full Sample Under Sanctions
Obs. Mean Std.
Dev.
Obs. Mean Std.
Dev.
t-test
(p-
value)
Total Flows (Bn. ) 22,381 0.81 4.40 893 0.02 0.88 0.00
Entries (Number) 22,381 32.53 75.30 893 3.74 9.21 0.00
Avg. Flow per Entry (Mn.
) 22,381 8.41 47.58 893 7.13 71.93 0.41
Declarants (Number) 22,381 26.25 56.31 893 3.63 8.80 0.00
Avg. Number of Entries per
Declarant 22,381 1.09 0.16 893 1.02 0.10 0.00
Asset Classes (Number) 22,381 3.51 2.38 893 1.88 1.10 0.00
Avg. Flow per Asset Class
per Declarant (Mn. )
22,381 3.37 39.38 893 6.58 71.90 0.01
Inflows (Bn. )
­ By German Investors 21,408 0.15 0.82 853 0.01 0.01 0.00
­ By Foreign Investors 11,625 0.59 3.19 221 0.01 0.01 0.01
Outflows (Bn. )
­ By German Investors 21,408 0.18 0.91 853 0.01 0.01 0.00
­ By Foreign Investors 11,625 0.37 2.25 221 0.01 0.01 0.01
Assets (Bn. )
­ Bonds 10,708 0.30 1.39 152 0.01 0.01 0.01
­ Commercial Paper 2,827 0.11 3.15 0 0.00 0.00
­ Stocks 9,414 0.29 1.64 203 0.01 0.01 0.01
­ Investment Certificate 5,071 0.17 0.84 41 0.00 0.00 0.19
­ Equity Capital 13,958 0.29 2.73 333 0.01 0.04 0.06
­ Direct Investment Credit 12,974 0.15 0.87 315 0.01 0.03 0.01
­ Credit 16,365 0.14 0.56 586 0.01 0.09 0.00
­ Other Capital 6,959 0.01 0.05 48 0.01 0.02 0.85
­ Coupon 291 0.02 0.09 0 0.00 0.00
Notes: The unit of observation is a country-month pair. If not noted otherwise, values refer to
the sum of inflows and outflows.
Table 3: The Effect of Sanctions on Cross-Border Capital Flows
Log Total
Flows
Log Inflows Log
Outflows
Log |Net
Flows|
Log Total
Flows
Log Inflows Log
Outflows
Log |Net
Flows|
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8)
Sanctions -0.827*
(0.436)
-0.962**
(0.475)
-0.781*
(0.423)
-0.689*
(0.352)
-0.420
(0.306)
-0.330
(0.800)
-0.492
(0.636)
-0.461*
(0.265)
Stock Market
Capitalization
0.001
(0.001)
0.002
(0.001)
0.001
(0.001)
0.001
(0.001)
Capital Account
Openness
0.771**
(0.355)
-0.059
(0.702)
0.776**
(0.357)
0.948**
(0.390)
Public Debt -0.003
(0.004)
-0.006
(0.004)
-0.005
(0.004)
0.001
(0.004)
Real GDP Growth 0.208
(0.169)
-0.278
(0.315)
0.562***
(0.215)
0.176
(0.139)
Log GDP per Capita 0.024
(0.071)
0.152
(0.149)
0.004
(0.075)
0.049
(0.081)
Observations 40,512 40,512 40,512 40,512 13,148 13,148 13,148 13,148
Adj. R˛ 0.808 0.788 0.806 0.764 0.815 0.732 0.745 0.663
Notes: OLS estimation. The dependent variable is the log of the total value for the capital flow specified at the top of each column. The unit of
observation is a country-month pair. Data cover the period from January 1999 through December 2014 in monthly frequency. Time fixed effects
and country-specific fixed effects are included but not reported. Robust standard errors (clustered by country) in parentheses. ***, ** and * denote
significant at the 1%, 5% and 10% level, respectively.
26
Table 4: The Effect of Sanctions on Cross-Border Financial Transactions
Without Additional Control Variables With Additional Control Variables
Log Total
Flows
Log
Inflows
Log
Outflows
Log |Net
Flows|
Log Total
Flows
Log
Inflows
Log
Outflows
Log |Net
Flows|
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8)
Log Total Value -0.827*
(0.436)
-0.962**
(0.475)
-0.781*
(0.423)
-0.689*
(0.352)
-0.420
(0.306)
-0.330
(0.800)
-0.492
(0.636)
-0.461*
(0.265)
Log Number of Entries -0.322***
(0.101)
-0.325***
(0.076)
-0.317***
(0.085)
-0.322***
(0.101)
-0.437**
(0.179)
-0.351*
(0.191)
-0.528**
(0.208)
-0.437**
(0.179)
Log Average Value per
Entry
-0.505
(0.358)
-0.628
(0.401)
-0.460
(0.343)
-0.368
(0.279)
0.016
(0.196)
0.070
(0.685)
-0.048
(0.603)
-0.026
(0.197)
Log Number of
Declarants
-0.300***
(0.099)
-0.308***
(0.075)
-0.308***
(0.075)
-0.300***
(0.099)
-0.391**
(0.174)
-0.312*
(0.185)
-0.312*
(0.185)
-0.391**
(0.174)
Log Number of Asset
Classes
-0.135**
(0.057)
-0.139***
(0.042)
-0.125**
(0.049)
-0.135**
(0.058)
-0.240**
(0.098)
-0.148
(0.125)
-0.251**
(0.123)
-0.240**
(0.098)
Log Avg. Value per
Asset Class per
Declarant
-0.392
(0.329)
-0.515
(0.409)
-0.357
(0.331)
-0.254
(0.252)
0.211
(0.204)
0.131
(0.628)
0.249
(0.575)
0.169
(0.229)
Notes: OLS estimation. Each cell contains the coefficient from a separate regression; the regression specification is similar to the corresponding
column in Table 3. The dependent variable is listed in the first column; the sample is specified at the top of each column. The unit of observation is
a country-month pair. Data cover the period from January 1999 through December 2014 in monthly frequency. Robust standard errors (clustered by
country) in parentheses. ***, ** and * denote significant at the 1%, 5% and 10% level, respectively.
27
Table 5: The Effect of Sanctions Cross-Border Capital Flows by Size of Destination Market
Without Additional Control Variables With Additional Control Variables
Log Total
Flows
Log
Inflows
Log
Outflows
Log |Net
Flows|
Log Total
Flows
Log
Inflows
Log
Outflows
Log |Net
Flows|
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8)
Sanctions Against
Large Countries
-0.745
(0.786)
-0.677
(0.832)
-0.828
(0.786)
-0.580
(0.611)
-0.392
(0.367)
0.525**
(0.222)
-0.929*
(0.551)
-0.470
(0.313)
Sanctions Against
Small Countries
-0.919***
(0.266)
-1.280***
(0.343)
-0.727***
(0.184)
-0.811***
(0.268)
-0.555***
(0.188)
-4.376***
(0.237)
1.579***
(0.207)
-0.417**
(0.197)
Observations 40,512 40,512 40,512 40,512 13,148 13,148 13,148 13,148
Adj. R˛ 0.808 0.788 0.806 0.764 0.815 0.734 0.745 0.663
Notes: OLS estimation. The regression specification is similar to the corresponding column in Table 3. The dependent variable is specified at the
top of each column. The unit of observation is a country-month pair. Data cover the period from January 1999 through December 2014 in monthly
frequency. Robust standard errors (clustered by country) recorded in parentheses. ***, ** and * denote significant at the 1%, 5% and 10% level,
respectively.
28
Table 6: A Characterization of Firms with Capital Flows under Sanctions
Recorded Capital Flows Only Capital Flows Including Zeros
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8)
Dummy Firm with
Capital Flows under
Sanctions
1.267***
(0.187)
1.185***
(0.164)
1.037***
(0.134)
0.215***
(0.082)
0.379***
(0.063)
0.372***
(0.062)
0.190***
(0.037)
0.121***
(0.029)
Log Total Value of
Firm Capital Flows
0.110***
(0.005)
0.106***
(0.004)
0.127***
(0.001)
0.127***
(0.001)
Log Number of
Capital Flows under
Sanctions by Firm
1.020***
(0.080)
0.097***
(0.013)
Time Fixed Effects Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes
Sector Fixed Effects No Yes Yes Yes No Yes Yes Yes
Observations 326,957 326,957 326,957 326,957 8,312,832 8,312,832 8,312,832 8,312,832
Firms 43,296 43,296 43,296 43,296 43,296 43,296 43,296 43,296
Adj. R˛ 0.032 0.080 0.265 0.305 0.009 0.017 0.794 0.795
Notes: OLS estimation. The dependent variable is the log number of firm capital flow transactions (firm-asset-partner triplet) in the German Balance
of Payments statistics. The unit of observation is a firm-month pair. Data cover the period from January 1999 through December 2014 in monthly
frequency (192 months). Robust standard errors (clustered by firm) recorded in parentheses. ***, ** and * denote significant at the 1%, 5% and
10% level, respectively.
29
Table 7: A Further Characterization of Firms with Capital Flows under Sanctions
Log Average
Value per
Transaction
Log Number
Countries
Log Number
Asset
Classes
Log Firm
Employment
Log Firm
Sales
Log Firm
Total Assets
Log Firm
Productivity
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7)
Dummy Firm with
Capital Flows under
Sanctions
-1.037***
(0.134)
0.956***
(0.118)
0.238***
(0.044)
0.409***
(0.154)
0.412**
(0.162)
0.447***
(0.128)
0.175*
(0.099)
Log Total Value of
Firm Capital Flows
0.890***
(0.005)
0.090***
(0.004)
0.035***
(0.002)
0.220***
(0.009)
0.268***
(0.011)
0.361***
(0.010)
0.070***
(0.005)
Time Fixed Effects Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes
Sector Fixed Effects Yes Yes Yes No No No No
Industry Fixed Effects No No No Yes Yes Yes Yes
Observations 326,957 326,957 326,957 16,491 16,070 17,929 14,217
Firms 43,296 43,296 43,296 4,819 4,820 5,216 4,386
Frequency Monthly Monthly Monthly Yearly Yearly Yearly Yearly
Adj. R˛ 0.947 0.236 0.150 0.561 0.562 0.539 0.312
Notes: OLS estimation. The dependent variable is listed in the first line; the regression specification is similar to column 4 in Table 4. Data cover
the period from January 1999 through December 2014 in monthly frequency. Robust standard errors (clustered by firm) recorded in parentheses.
***, ** and * denote significant at the 1%, 5% and 10% level, respectively.
30
Table 8: The Effects of Sanctions on Third-Country Capital Flows
Log Total
Flows
Log
Inflows
Log
Outflows
Log |Net
Flows|
Log Total
Flows
Log
Inflows
Log
Outflows
Log |Net
Flows|
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8)
Affected Declarant 0.437***
(0.045)
0.456***
(0.052)
0.323***
(0.049)
0.307***
(0.038)
0.415***
(0.051)
0.412***
(0.058)
0.316***
(0.053)
0.287***
(0.043)
Stock Market
Capitalization
0.001***
(0.000)
0.002***
(0.000)
0.001**
(0.000)
0.001***
(0.000)
Capital Account
Openness
0.304*
(0.173)
0.242
(0.333)
0.428**
(0.193)
0.319**
(0.151)
Public Debt -0.001
(0.001)
0.002
(0.002)
-0.001
(0.001)
-0.001
(0.001)
Real GDP Growth 0.019
(0.059)
-0.059
(0.090)
0.061
(0.068)
0.041
(0.056)
Log GDP per Capita -0.059
(0.037)
-0.079
(0.061)
-0.063
(0.044)
-0.054
(0.033)
Observations 571,799 295,600 416,075 565,942 454,816 231,200 335,465 450,410
Adj. R˛ 0.681 0.710 0.683 0.619 0.683 0.710 0.681 0.620
Notes: OLS estimation. The dependent variable is specified at the top of each column. The unit of observation is a firm-country-month triplet. Data
cover the period from January 1999 through December 2014 in monthly frequency. Time fixed effects and firm-country-specific fixed effects are
included but not reported. Robust standard errors (clustered by country) recorded in parentheses. ***, ** and * denote significant at the 1%, 5% and
10% level, respectively.
31
Table 9: The Effects of Sanctions on Third-Country Capital Flows Extended
Log Total
Flows
Log Inflows Log
Outflows
Log |Net
Flows|
Log Total
Flows
Log Inflows Log
Outflows
Log |Net
Flows|
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8)
EU -0.085
(0.119)
-0.125
(0.151)
-0.030
(0.137)
0.047
(0.117)
-0.074
(0.120)
-0.001
(0.152)
-0.021
(0.141)
0.047
(0.120)
UN -0.419
(0.714)
-0.546*
(0.284)
0.111
(1.064)
0.016
(0.576)
0.304
(0.704)
0.138
(0.387)
0.785
(0.999)
0.487
(0.642)
Affected Declarant EU
Top5
0.783***
(0.203)
0.769***
(0.189)
0.642***
(0.201)
0.593***
(0.170)
0.777***
(0.206)
0.761***
(0.188)
0.666***
(0.202)
0.587***
(0.173)
Affected Declarant EU Rest 0.425***
(0.054)
0.454***
(0.059)
0.345***
(0.059)
0.259***
(0.045)
0.415***
(0.060)
0.422***
(0.066)
0.344***
(0.064)
0.252***
(0.051)
Affected Declarant UN
Top5
0.457
(0.347)
0.292
(0.417)
0.348
(0.351)
0.552**
(0.258)
0.411
(0.340)
0.215
(0.400)
0.312
(0.339)
0.508**
(0.254)
Affected Declarant UN Rest 0.242***
(0.089)
0.296**
(0.116)
0.048
(0.098)
0.195**
(0.077)
0.138
(0.095)
0.167
(0.123)
-0.005
(0.101)
0.083
(0.081)
Stock Market
Capitalization
0.001***
(0.000)
0.002***
(0.000)
0.001**
(0.000)
0.001***
(0.000)
Capital Account Openness 0.357**
(0.157)
0.246
(0.279)
0.438**
(0.175)
0.393***
(0.140)
Public Debt -0.001
(0.001)
0.002
(0.002)
-0.002
(0.001)
-0.001
(0.001)
Real GDP Growth 0.015
(0.058)
-0.052
(0.087)
0.048
(0.067)
0.044
(0.055)
Log GDP per Capita -0.036
(0.038)
-0.072
(0.059)
-0.038
(0.045)
-0.033
(0.035)
Observations 587,557 302,394 427,625 581,556 467,657 236,550 344,881 463,160
Adj. R˛ 0.681 0.710 0.683 0.618 0.681 0.709 0.680 0.619
Notes: OLS estimation. The dependent variable is specified at the top of each column. The unit of observation is a firm-country-month triplet. Data
cover the period from January 1999 through December 2014 in monthly frequency. Time fixed effects and firm-country-specific fixed effects are
included but not reported. Robust standard errors (clustered by country) recorded in parentheses. ***, ** and * denote significant at the 1%, 5% and
10% level, respectively.
32
Table 10: The Effects of Sanctions on Firm Performance
Log Firm
Employment
Log Firm
Sales
Log Firm
Total Assets
Log Firm
Wages
Log Firm
Capital
Intensity
Log Firm
Productivity
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6)
Affected Declarant -0.015
(0.066)
-0.063
(0.087)
0.058
(0.061)
0.026
(0.035)
-0.047
(0.119)
0.120
(0.079)
Time Fixed Effects Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes
Firm Fixed Effects Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes
Observations 16,492 16,069 17,929 16,305 16,045 14,217
Firms 4,820 4,820 5,216 4,766 4,676 4,386
Frequency Yearly Yearly Yearly Yearly Yearly Yearly
Adj. R˛ 0.961 0.946 0.975 0.797 0.899 0.839
Notes: OLS estimation. The dependent variable is listed in the first line. Data cover the period from January 1999 through December 2014 in annual
frequency. Robust standard errors (clustered by firm) recorded in parentheses. ***, ** and * denote significant at the 1%, 5% and 10% level,
respectively.
33
34
Appendix 1: Matching Procedure
Most of our estimates are based on data from a single source, the Deutsche Bundesbank's
Balance of Payments (BoP) statistics. However, for some analyses, we also link the
information from the BoP statistics to firm-level information taken from the Deutsche
Bundesbank's corporate balance sheets database (Ustan).
Collected for different purposes and by different departments within Deutsche Bundesbank,
the data lack a unique firm identifier. Therefore, following common internal practice, we
apply a string matching procedure, where the algorithm takes into account the name of a unit,
its address and its legal form, to identify the same real-world entity in the two data sets.
Schild, Schultz, and Wieser (2017) provide an extensive documentation of this procedure and
a detailed evaluation of the match result.
Table A1 presents a brief overview of the various data samples. As shown, 12.1 percent of the
non-financial reporting units in the BoP are matched to data in Ustan, covering about 12.7
percent of the BoP entries. More notably, the matched data set does not differ significantly
from the BoP data. While matched units are expected to be relatively large, their cross-border
financial flows only marginally exceed the averages in the BoP sample.
Table A1: Descriptive Statistics on the Matched Sample, 1999-2014
BoP Ustan BoP-Ustan
(1) (2) (3)
Frequency Monthly Yearly Monthly
Observations (Number) 734,441 454,362 93,267
Firms (Number) 43,310 71,816 5,237
Mean Total Flows (1,000 ) 25,029 26,621
Mean Inflows (1,000 ) 13,915 14,211
Mean Outflows (1,000 ) 11,114 12,410
Mean Net Flows (1,000 ) 2,801 1,800
Share of Sanctioned
Observations (%)
0.5 0.6
Notes: All data have been obtained from the Deutsche Bundesbank. BoP is the balance of
payments; Ustan is the corporate balance sheet statistics.
